First draft of Helm GCP guide (#17503)
grafana/loki: docs/sources/setup/install/helm/deployment-guides/gcp.md

{{< admonition type="note" >}}
GEL customers will require a third bucket to store the admin data. This bucket is not required for OSS users.
{{< /admonition >}}

```bash
gcloud storage buckets create gs://<CHUNKS_BUCKET_NAME> gs://<RULER_BUCKET_NAME> \
  --location=<REGION> \
  --default-storage-class=STANDARD \
  --public-access-prevention \
  --uniform-bucket-level-access \
  --soft-delete-duration=7d
```

Make sure to replace the `region` and `bucket` name with your desired values. We will revisit the bucket policy later in this guide.

Here's an example with all the variables filled in:

```bash
gcloud storage buckets create gs://loki-gcp-chunks gs://loki-gcp-ruler \
  --location=europe-west4 \
  --default-storage-class=STANDARD \
  --public-access-prevention \
  --uniform-bucket-level-access \
  --soft-delete-duration=7d
```

When you run this command, you should get something like this in response:

```bash
Creating gs://loki-gcp-chunks/...
Creating gs://loki-gcp-ruler/...
```

## Defining IAM roles and policies

> IAM determines who can access which resources on GCP and can be configured in several ways. The recommended method for allowing Loki to access GCS is to use Workload Identity Federation. This method is more secure than using creating and distributing a service account key. The below steps show how to create the role and policy using the gcloud CLI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
IAM determines who can access which resources on GCP and can be configured in several ways. The recommended method for allowing Loki to access GCS is to use Workload Identity Federation. This method is more secure than creating and distributing a service account key. The below steps show how to create the role and policy using the gcloud CLI.
```

### Authenticating to the GKE cluster

You need to be able to run `kubectl` commands on the cluster, so make sure you have it installed (run `gcloud components install kubectl` if not) and then run this command:

```bash
gcloud container clusters get-credentials <CLUSTER_NAME> \
  --region=<REGION>
```

Here's an example of that command with the variables filled in:

```bash
gcloud container clusters get-credentials loki-gcp \
  --region=europe-west4
```

> This will authenticate you via your GCP IAM identity, write the cluster's access info to your local kubeconfig (usually `~/.kube/config`), and then allow `kubectl` commands talk to the right cluster from now on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will authenticate you via your GCP IAM identity, write the cluster's access info to your local kubeconfig (usually `~/.kube/config`), and then allow `kubectl` commands to talk to the right cluster from now on.
```

Then check that you're connected to the GKE cluster and that you're accessing it via `kubectl` by running:

```bash
kubectl config current-context
```

You should get something like this in return:

```bash
gke_my-project-123456_europe-west4_loki-gcp
```

### Create a Kubernetes Namespace

> Create a K8s namespace where you'll install your Loki workloads:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a Kubernetes namespace where you'll install your Loki workloads:
```

```bash
kubectl create namespace <NAMESPACE>
```

Replace `<NAMESPACE>` with the namespace where your Loki workloads will be located.

Example:

```bash
kubectl create namespace loki
```

You should get the output:

```bash
namespace/loki created
```
### Create Kubernetes Service Account (KSA)

A KSA is a cluster identity (service account, named `default` by default) assigned to pods that allows pods to interact with each other.

> Create a KSA on your K8s cluster:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a KSA on your Kubernetes cluster:
```

```bash
kubectl create serviceaccount <KSA_NAME> \
  --namespace <NAMESPACE>
```

> Replace `<KSA_NAME>` with the name of the KSA created above, and `<NAMESPACE>` with the namespace where your Loki/GEL workloads are located.

Reviewer: I think this is the only place (or one of two) where you say "Loki/GEL". Do you want to just say Loki, or go back through and say Loki/GEL everywhere?

Author: Fixed! Removed "/GEL" and just said Loki in two instances.

Example:

```bash
kubectl create serviceaccount loki-gcp-ksa \
  --namespace loki
```

You should get this in response:

```bash
serviceaccount/loki-gcp-ksa created
```

### Add IAM Policy to Bucket(s)

> > [!NOTE]
> > The [pre-defined `role/storage.objectUser` role](https://cloud.google.com/storage/docs/access-control/iam-roles) is sufficient for Loki / GEL to
>  operate. See [IAM permissions for Cloud Storage](https://cloud.google.com/storage/docs/access-control/iam-permissions) for details about each individual
>  permission. You can use this predefined role or create your own with matching permissions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{< admonition type="note" >}}
The [pre-defined `role/storage.objectUser` role](https://cloud.google.com/storage/docs/access-control/iam-roles) is sufficient for Loki / GEL to
 operate. See [IAM permissions for Cloud Storage](https://cloud.google.com/storage/docs/access-control/iam-permissions) for details about each individual
 permission. You can use this predefined role or create your own with matching permissions.
{{< /admonition >}}
```

> Create an IAM policy binding on the bucket(s) using the KSA created previously and the role(s) of your choice. One command per bucket.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create an IAM policy binding on the bucket(s) using the KSA created previously and the role(s) of your choice. Use a separate command for each bucket.
```

         schema: v13
         index:
           prefix: loki_index_
           period: 24h
   storage_config:
     gcs:
       bucket_name: <CHUNK_BUCKET_NAME> # Your actual gcs bucket name, for example, loki-gcp-chunks
   ingester:
       chunk_encoding: snappy
   pattern_ingester:
       enabled: true
   limits_config:
     allow_structured_metadata: true
     volume_enabled: true
     retention_period: 672h # 28 days retention
   compactor:
     retention_enabled: true 
     delete_request_store: gcs
   ruler:
    enable_api: true
    storage_config:
      type: gcs
      gcs_storage_config:
        region: <REGION> # The GCS region, for example europe-west4
        bucketnames: <RULER_BUCKET_NAME> # Your actual gcs bucket name, for example, loki-gcp-ruler
      alertmanager_url: http://prom:9093 # The URL of the Alertmanager to send alerts (Prometheus, Mimir, etc.)

   querier:
      max_concurrent: 4

   storage:
      type: gcs
      bucketNames:
        chunks: <CHUNK_BUCKET_NAME> # Your actual gcs bucket name, for example, loki-gcp-chunks
        ruler: <RULER_BUCKET_NAME> # Your actual gcs bucket name, for example, loki-gcp-ruler
      
serviceAccount:

>  create: false

Reviewer: Shouldn't this be set to `true`?  Down at line 447 you talk about how this section defines the IAM role for the service account.

Author: That particular line says that a service account should not be _created_ by the config, and instead an existing one should be used. Do you think it's worth adding a note to explain this?

Reviewer: Yeah, worth adding a note for that.

 name: loki-gcp-ksa

deploymentMode: Distributed

ingester:
 replicas: 3
 zoneAwareReplication:
  enabled: false

querier:
 replicas: 3
 maxUnavailable: 2

queryFrontend:
 replicas: 2
 maxUnavailable: 1

queryScheduler:
 replicas: 2

> distributor:
>  replicas: 3
>  maxUnavailable: 2
> compactor:
>  replicas: 1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
distributor:
 replicas: 3
 maxUnavailable: 2
 
compactor:
 replicas: 1
```

In this guide, we deploy Loki using `n2-standard-8` instances. This is a instance type that should work for most scenarios. However, you can modify the instance types and count based on your specific needs.
{{< /admonition >}}

The minimum requirements for deploying Loki on GKE are: 

- Kubernetes version `1.30` or above.
- `3` nodes for the GKE cluster.
- Instance type depends on your workload. A good starting point for a production cluster is `n2-standard-8`.

Here is an example of a command you can run using gcloud CLI to create a new cluster:

```bash
gcloud container clusters create loki-gcp \
  --location=europe-west4 \
  --num-nodes=1 \
  --machine-type=n2-standard-8 \
  --release-channel=regular \
  --workload-pool=<PROJECT_ID>.svc.id.goog \
  --enable-ip-alias \
  --no-enable-basic-auth \
  --no-issue-client-certificate
```

Replace `<PROJECT_ID>` with the ID of the project you want to create the cluster in. This should be something like `my-project-123456`.

> {{< admonition type="warning" >}}

Author: Done! Moved it before the command.

Create a KSA on your Kubernetes cluster:

```bash
kubectl create serviceaccount <KSA_NAME> \
  --namespace <NAMESPACE>
```

Replace `<KSA_NAME>` with the name of the KSA created above, and `<NAMESPACE>` with the namespace where your Loki workloads are located.

Example:

```bash
kubectl create serviceaccount loki-gcp-ksa \
  --namespace loki
```

You should get this in response:

```bash
serviceaccount/loki-gcp-ksa created
```

### Add IAM Policy to Bucket(s)

{{< admonition type="note" >}}
The [pre-defined `role/storage.objectUser` role](https://cloud.google.com/storage/docs/access-control/iam-roles) is sufficient for Loki to
 operate. See [IAM permissions for Cloud Storage](https://cloud.google.com/storage/docs/access-control/iam-permissions) for details about each individual
 permission. You can use this predefined role or create your own with matching permissions.
{{< /admonition >}}

Create an IAM policy binding on the bucket(s) using the KSA created previously and the role(s) of your choice. Use a separate command for each bucket.

```txt
gcloud storage buckets add-iam-policy-binding gs://<BUCKET_NAME> \

>   --role=roles/storage.objectViewer \

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 --role=roles/storage.objectAdmin \
```

  --member=principal://iam.googleapis.com/projects/<PROJECT_NUMBER>/locations/global/workloadIdentityPools/<PROJECT_ID>.svc.id.goog/subject/ns/<NAMESPACE>/sa/<KSA_NAME> \
  --condition=None
```

Replace `<PROJECT_ID>` with the GCP project ID (ex. project-name), `<PROJECT_NUMBER>` with the project number (ex. 1234567890),
`<NAMESPACE>` with the namespace where Loki is installed, and `<KSA_NAME>` with the name of the KSA you created above.

Example:

```bash
gcloud storage buckets add-iam-policy-binding gs://loki-gcp-chunks \

>   --role=roles/storage.objectViewer \

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  --role=roles/storage.objectAdmin \
```

  --condition=None
```

You should get something like this in response:

```bash
bindings:
- members:
  - projectEditor:my-project-123456
  - projectOwner:my-project-123456
  role: roles/storage.legacyBucketOwner
- members:
  - projectViewer:my-project-123456
  role: roles/storage.legacyBucketReader
- members:
  - projectEditor:my-project-123456
  - projectOwner:my-project-123456
  role: roles/storage.legacyObjectOwner
- members:
  - projectViewer:my-project-123456
  role: roles/storage.legacyObjectReader
- members:
  - principal://iam.googleapis.com/projects/12345678901/locations/global/workloadIdentityPools/my-project-123456.svc.id.goog/subject/ns/loki/sa/loki-gcp-ksa
  role: roles/storage.objectViewer
etag: CAI=
kind: storage#policy
resourceId: projects/_/buckets/loki-gcp-chunks
version: 1
```

## Deploying the Helm chart

Before we can deploy the Loki Helm chart, we need to add the Grafana chart repository to Helm. This repository contains the Loki Helm chart.

1. Add the Grafana chart repository to Helm:

    ```bash
    helm repo add grafana https://grafana.github.io/helm-charts
    ```
2. Update the chart repository:

    ```bash
    helm repo update
    ```

> 3. Create a new namespace for Loki:

Author: You're right, oops! Removed that bit.

      // Check for successful read
      check(res, { 'successful instant query': (res) => res.status == 200 });

      // Execute range query over last 5m and limit 1000
      res = client.rangeQuery(`{format="${format}"}`, "5m", 1000)
      // Check for successful read
      check(res, { 'successful range query': (res) => res.status == 200 });

      // Wait before next iteration
      sleep(1);
    }

    /**
    * Helper function to get random item from array
    */
    function randomChoice(items) {
      return items[Math.floor(Math.random() * items.length)];
    }
   ```

   **Replace `<EXTERNAL-IP>` with the external IP address of the Loki Gateway service.**

   This script will write logs to Loki and query logs from Loki. It will write logs in a random format between 800KB and 2MB and query logs in a random format over the last 5 minutes.
  
3. Run the test:

    ```bash
    ./k6 run gcp-test.js
    ```

    This will run the test and output the results. You should see the test writing logs to Loki and querying logs from Loki.

Now that you have successfully deployed Loki in microservices mode on GCP, you may wish to explore the following:

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [Monitor a Loki Cluster](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/<LOKI_VERSION>/operations/meta-monitoring/)
```

    loki-results-cache-0                    2/2     Running   0          10m
    loki-ruler-0                            1/1     Running   0          10m
    ```
  
### Find the Loki Gateway Service

The Loki Gateway service is a LoadBalancer service that exposes the Loki gateway to the internet. This is where you will write logs to and query logs from. By default NGINX is used as the gateway.

{{< admonition type="caution" >}}
The Loki Gateway service is exposed to the internet. We provide basic authentication using a username and password in this tutorial. Refer to the [Authentication](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/<LOKI_VERSION>/operations/authentication/) documentation for more information.
{{< /admonition >}}

To find the Loki Gateway service, run the following command:

```bash
kubectl get svc -n loki
```
You should see the Loki Gateway service with an external IP address. This is the address you will use to write to and query Loki.

```console
  NAME                             TYPE           CLUSTER-IP       EXTERNAL-IP                                                               PORT(S)              AGE

> loki-gateway                   LoadBalancer   34.118.239.140   34.91.203.240   80:30566/TCP                 25m

Author: Done! Adjusted them all because they were slightly off.
